README.md, before:

# Cipher

<div align="center">

<img src="./assets/cipher-logo.png" alt="Cipher Agent Logo" width="400" />

<p align="center">
<em>Memory-powered AI agent framework with MCP integration</em>
</p>

<p align="center">
<a href="LICENSE"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Elastic%202.0-blue.svg" alt="License" /></a>
<img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-Beta-orange.svg" alt="Beta" />
<a href="https://docs.byterover.dev/cipher/overview"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Docs-Documentation-green.svg" alt="Documentation" /></a>
<a href="https://discord.com/invite/UMRrpNjh5W"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Discord-Join%20Community-7289da" alt="Discord" /></a>
</p>

</div>

## Overview

Cipher is an opensource memory layer specifically designed for coding agents. Compatible with **Cursor, Windsurf, Claude Desktop, Claude Code, Gemini CLI, VS Code, and Roo Code** through MCP, and coding agents, such as **Kimi K2**. (see more on [examples](./examples))

**Key Features:**

- Connect with your favorite IDEs through MCP.
- Auto-generated memories that scale with your codebase.
- Dual Memory Layer that captures **System 1** (Programming Concepts & Business Logic & Past Interaction) and **System 2** (reasoning steps of the model when generating code).
- Install on your IDE with zero configuration needed.
- Switch seamlessly between IDEs without losing memory.
- Shared memory workspace across the team in real time.

## Quick Start

### NPM Package (Recommended for Most Users)

```bash
# Install globally
npm install -g @byterover/cipher

# Or install locally in your project
npm install @byterover/cipher
```

### Docker

```bash
# Clone and setup
git clone https://github.com/campfirein/cipher.git
cd cipher

# Configure environment
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your API keys

# Start with Docker
docker-compose up -d

# Test
curl http://localhost:3000/health
```

### From Source

```bash
pnpm i && pnpm run build && npm link
```

### CLI Usage

```bash
# Interactive mode
cipher

# One-shot command
cipher "Add this to memory as common causes of 'CORS error' in local dev with Vite + Express."

# API server mode
cipher --mode api

# MCP server mode
cipher --mode mcp
```

## Configuration

Configure Cipher using environment variables and YAML config:

### Environment Variables (.env)

```bash
# Required: At least one API key (except OPENAI_API_KEY is always required for embedding)
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_anthropic_api_key
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_openrouter_api_key

# Ollama (self-hosted, no API key needed)
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://localhost:11434/v1

# Optional
CIPHER_LOG_LEVEL=info
NODE_ENV=production
```

### Agent Configuration (memAgent/cipher.yml)

```yaml
# LLM Configuration
llm:
  provider: openai # openai, anthropic, openrouter, ollama
  model: gpt-4-turbo
  apiKey: $OPENAI_API_KEY

# System Prompt
systemPrompt: 'You are a helpful AI assistant with memory capabilities.'

# MCP Servers (optional)
mcpServers:
  filesystem:
    type: stdio
    command: npx
    args: ['-y', '@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem', '.']
```

## Capabilities

- **Multiple Operation Modes**: CLI interactive, one-shot commands, REST API server, MCP server
- **Session Management**: Create, switch, and manage multiple conversation sessions
- **Memory Integration**: Persistent memory that learns from every interaction
- **MCP Protocol Support**: Full Model Context Protocol integration for tools and resources
- **Multi-LLM Support**: OpenAI, Anthropic, OpenRouter, and Ollama compatibility
- **Knowledge Graph**: Structured memory with entity relationships (Neo4j, in-memory)
- **Real-time Learning**: Memory layers that improve automatically with usage

## LLM Providers

Cipher supports multiple LLM providers:

### OpenAI

```yaml
llm:
  provider: openai
  model: gpt-4-turbo
  apiKey: $OPENAI_API_KEY
```

### Anthropic Claude

```yaml
llm:
  provider: anthropic
  model: claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022
  apiKey: $ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
```

### OpenRouter (200+ Models)

```yaml
llm:
  provider: openrouter
  model: openai/gpt-4-turbo # Any OpenRouter model
  apiKey: $OPENROUTER_API_KEY
```

### Ollama (Self-Hosted, No API Key)

```yaml
llm:
  provider: ollama
  model: qwen2.5:32b # Recommended for best performance
  baseURL: $OLLAMA_BASE_URL
```

## CLI Reference

```bash
# Basic usage
cipher                              # Interactive CLI mode
cipher "Your prompt here"           # One-shot mode

# Server modes
cipher --mode api                   # REST API server
cipher --mode mcp                   # MCP server

# Configuration
cipher --agent /path/to/config.yml  # Custom config
cipher --strict                     # Strict MCP connections
cipher --new-session [id]           # Start with new session

# CLI commands
/session list                       # List sessions
/session new [id]                   # Create session
/session switch <id>                # Switch session
/config                             # Show config
/stats                              # Show statistics
/help                               # Show help
```

## MCP Server Usage

Cipher can run as an MCP (Model Context Protocol) server, allowing integration with MCP-compatible clients like Claude Desktop, Cursor, Windsurf, and other AI coding assistants.

### Quick Setup

To use Cipher as an MCP server in your MCP client configuration:

```json
{
	"mcpServers": {
		"cipher": {
			"type": "stdio",
			"command": "cipher",
			"args": ["--mode", "mcp"],
			"env": {
				"OPENAI_API_KEY": "your_openai_api_key",
				"ANTHROPIC_API_KEY": "your_anthropic_api_key"
			}
		}
	}
}
```

### Example Configurations

#### Claude Desktop Configuration

Add to your Claude Desktop MCP configuration file:

```json
{
	"mcpServers": {
		"cipher": {
			"type": "stdio",
			"command": "cipher",
			"args": ["--mode", "mcp"],
			"env": {
				"OPENAI_API_KEY": "sk-your-openai-key",
				"ANTHROPIC_API_KEY": "sk-ant-your-anthropic-key"
			}
		}
	}
}
```

#### Cursor/Windsurf Configuration

Add to your MCP settings:

```json
{
	"mcpServers": {
		"cipher-memory": {
			"type": "stdio",
			"command": "cipher",
			"args": ["--mode", "mcp", "--agent", "memAgent/cipher.yml"],
			"env": {
				"OPENAI_API_KEY": "sk-your-openai-key",
				"CIPHER_LOG_LEVEL": "info"
			}
		}
	}
}
```

#### With Custom Configuration

```json
{
	"mcpServers": {
		"cipher": {
			"type": "stdio",
			"command": "cipher",
			"args": ["--mode", "mcp", "--agent", "/path/to/custom-config.yml", "--strict"],
			"env": {
				"OPENAI_API_KEY": "sk-your-openai-key",
				"ANTHROPIC_API_KEY": "sk-ant-your-anthropic-key",
				"OPENROUTER_API_KEY": "sk-or-your-openrouter-key",
				"CIPHER_LOG_LEVEL": "debug",
				"NODE_ENV": "production"
			}
		}
	}
}
```

### Environment Variables

The MCP server requires at least one LLM provider API key:

```bash
# Required (at least one)
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key      # Always required for embedding
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_anthropic_api_key
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_openrouter_api_key

# Optional
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://localhost:11434/v1
CIPHER_LOG_LEVEL=info
NODE_ENV=production
```

### Available Capabilities

When running as an MCP server, Cipher exposes:

**Tools:**

- `ask_cipher` - Chat interface with the memory-powered agent
- Dynamic tool discovery from your agent configuration

**Resources:**

- `cipher://agent/card` - Agent metadata and information
- `cipher://agent/stats` - Runtime statistics and metrics

**Prompts:**

- `system_prompt` - Current system prompt used by the agent

### Configuration Options

```bash
# Basic MCP server
cipher --mode mcp

# With custom agent config
cipher --mode mcp --agent /path/to/custom-config.yml

# Strict mode (all MCP connections must succeed)
cipher --mode mcp --strict

# With new session
cipher --mode mcp --new-session my-session-id
```

## Use Case: Claude Code with Cipher MCP

Cipher integrates seamlessly with Claude Code through MCP, providing persistent memory that enhances your coding experience. Here's how it works:

### Memory Storage

<img src="./assets/cipher_store_memory.png" alt="Cipher storing conversation context" />

Every interaction with Claude Code can be automatically stored in Cipher's dual memory system, capturing both programming concepts and reasoning patterns to improve future assistance.

### Memory Retrieval

<img src="./assets/cipher_retrieve_memory.png" alt="Cipher retrieving previous conversation context" />

When you ask Claude Code to recall previous conversations, Cipher's memory layer instantly retrieves relevant context, allowing you to continue where you left off without losing important details.

For detailed configuration instructions, see the [CLI Coding Agents guide](./examples/02-cli-coding-agents/README.md).

## Next Steps

For detailed documentation, visit:

- [Quick Start Guide](https://docs.byterover.dev/cipher/quickstart)
- [Configuration Guide](https://docs.byterover.dev/cipher/configuration)
- [Complete Documentation](https://docs.byterover.dev/cipher/overview)

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Refer to our [Contributing Guide](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for more details.

## Community & Support

**cipher** is the opensource version of the agentic memory of [byterover](https://byterover.dev/) which is built and maintained by the byterover team.

- Join our [Discord](https://discord.com/invite/UMRrpNjh5W) to share projects, ask questions, or just say hi!
- If you enjoy cipher, please give us a ⭐ on GitHub—it helps a lot!
- Follow [@kevinnguyendn](https://x.com/kevinnguyendn) on X

## Contributors

Thanks to all these amazing people for contributing to cipher!

[Contributors](https://github.com/campfirein/cipher/graphs/contributors)

## Star History

<a href="https://star-history.com/#campfirein/cipher&Date">
  <img width="500" alt="Star History Chart" src="https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=campfirein/cipher&type=Date&v=2">
</a>

## License

Elastic License 2.0. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for full terms.

Commit message:

Add support for Google Gemini AI integration
- Updated package.json to include @google/generative-ai dependency.
- Enhanced LLM configuration to support 'gemini' as a provider, including API key validation.
- Implemented GeminiMessageFormatter for formatting messages specific to Gemini.
- Created GeminiService to handle interactions with the Google Generative AI API.
- Added tests for GeminiService to ensure proper functionality and configuration.
- Updated README.md with Gemini provider documentation and usage instructions.

README.md, after:

# Cipher

<div align="center">

<img src="./assets/cipher-logo.png" alt="Cipher Agent Logo" width="400" />

<p align="center">
<em>Memory-powered AI agent framework with MCP integration</em>
</p>

<p align="center">
<a href="LICENSE"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Elastic%202.0-blue.svg" alt="License" /></a>
<img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-Beta-orange.svg" alt="Beta" />
<a href="https://docs.byterover.dev/cipher/overview"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Docs-Documentation-green.svg" alt="Documentation" /></a>
<a href="https://discord.com/invite/UMRrpNjh5W"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Discord-Join%20Community-7289da" alt="Discord" /></a>
</p>

</div>

## Overview

Cipher is an opensource memory layer specifically designed for coding agents. Compatible with **Cursor, Windsurf, Claude Desktop, Claude Code, Gemini CLI, VS Code, and Roo Code** through MCP, and coding agents, such as **Kimi K2**. (see more on [examples](./examples))

**Key Features:**

- Connect with your favorite IDEs through MCP.
- Auto-generated memories that scale with your codebase.
- Dual Memory Layer that captures **System 1** (Programming Concepts & Business Logic & Past Interaction) and **System 2** (reasoning steps of the model when generating code).
- Install on your IDE with zero configuration needed.
- Switch seamlessly between IDEs without losing memory.
- Shared memory workspace across the team in real time.

## Quick Start

### NPM Package (Recommended for Most Users)

```bash
# Install globally
npm install -g @byterover/cipher

# Or install locally in your project
npm install @byterover/cipher
```

### Docker

```bash
# Clone and setup
git clone https://github.com/campfirein/cipher.git
cd cipher

# Configure environment
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your API keys

# Start with Docker
docker-compose up -d

# Test
curl http://localhost:3000/health
```

### From Source

```bash
pnpm i && pnpm run build && npm link
```

### CLI Usage

```bash
# Interactive mode
cipher

# One-shot command
cipher "Add this to memory as common causes of 'CORS error' in local dev with Vite + Express."

# API server mode
cipher --mode api

# MCP server mode
cipher --mode mcp
```

## Configuration

Configure Cipher using environment variables and YAML config:

### Environment Variables (.env)

```bash
# Required: At least one API key (except OPENAI_API_KEY is always required for embedding)
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_anthropic_api_key
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_openrouter_api_key

# Ollama (self-hosted, no API key needed)
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://localhost:11434/v1

# Optional
CIPHER_LOG_LEVEL=info
NODE_ENV=production
```

### Agent Configuration (memAgent/cipher.yml)

```yaml
# LLM Configuration
llm:
  provider: openai # openai, anthropic, openrouter, ollama
  model: gpt-4-turbo
  apiKey: $OPENAI_API_KEY

# System Prompt
systemPrompt: 'You are a helpful AI assistant with memory capabilities.'

# MCP Servers (optional)
mcpServers:
  filesystem:
    type: stdio
    command: npx
    args: ['-y', '@modelcontextprotocol/server-filesystem', '.']
```

## Capabilities

- **Multiple Operation Modes**: CLI interactive, one-shot commands, REST API server, MCP server
- **Session Management**: Create, switch, and manage multiple conversation sessions
- **Memory Integration**: Persistent memory that learns from every interaction
- **MCP Protocol Support**: Full Model Context Protocol integration for tools and resources
- **Multi-LLM Support**: OpenAI, Anthropic, OpenRouter, and Ollama compatibility
- **Knowledge Graph**: Structured memory with entity relationships (Neo4j, in-memory)
- **Real-time Learning**: Memory layers that improve automatically with usage

## LLM Providers

Cipher supports multiple LLM providers:

### OpenAI

```yaml
llm:
  provider: openai
  model: gpt-4-turbo
  apiKey: $OPENAI_API_KEY
```

### Anthropic Claude

```yaml
llm:
  provider: anthropic
  model: claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022
  apiKey: $ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
```

### OpenRouter (200+ Models)

```yaml
llm:
  provider: openrouter
  model: openai/gpt-4-turbo # Any OpenRouter model
  apiKey: $OPENROUTER_API_KEY
```

### Ollama (Self-Hosted, No API Key)

```yaml
llm:
  provider: ollama
  model: qwen2.5:32b # Recommended for best performance
  baseURL: $OLLAMA_BASE_URL
```

### Gemini (Google)

```yaml
llm:
  provider: gemini
  model: gemini-pro
  apiKey: $GEMINI_API_KEY # Or set GEMINI_API_KEY in your environment
```

- Full tool calling and MCP tool integration supported.
- If `apiKey` is not set, will use `GEMINI_API_KEY` from environment.
- See Google Gemini documentation for available models and quotas.

## CLI Reference

```bash
# Basic usage
cipher                              # Interactive CLI mode
cipher "Your prompt here"           # One-shot mode

# Server modes
cipher --mode api                   # REST API server
cipher --mode mcp                   # MCP server

# Configuration
cipher --agent /path/to/config.yml  # Custom config
cipher --strict                     # Strict MCP connections
cipher --new-session [id]           # Start with new session

# CLI commands
/session list                       # List sessions
/session new [id]                   # Create session
/session switch <id>                # Switch session
/config                             # Show config
/stats                              # Show statistics
/help                               # Show help
```

## MCP Server Usage

Cipher can run as an MCP (Model Context Protocol) server, allowing integration with MCP-compatible clients like Claude Desktop, Cursor, Windsurf, and other AI coding assistants.

### Quick Setup

To use Cipher as an MCP server in your MCP client configuration:

```json
{
	"mcpServers": {
		"cipher": {
			"type": "stdio",
			"command": "cipher",
			"args": ["--mode", "mcp"],
			"env": {
				"OPENAI_API_KEY": "your_openai_api_key",
				"ANTHROPIC_API_KEY": "your_anthropic_api_key"
			}
		}
	}
}
```

### Example Configurations

#### Claude Desktop Configuration

Add to your Claude Desktop MCP configuration file:

```json
{
	"mcpServers": {
		"cipher": {
			"type": "stdio",
			"command": "cipher",
			"args": ["--mode", "mcp"],
			"env": {
				"OPENAI_API_KEY": "sk-your-openai-key",
				"ANTHROPIC_API_KEY": "sk-ant-your-anthropic-key"
			}
		}
	}
}
```

#### Cursor/Windsurf Configuration

Add to your MCP settings:

```json
{
	"mcpServers": {
		"cipher-memory": {
			"type": "stdio",
			"command": "cipher",
			"args": ["--mode", "mcp", "--agent", "memAgent/cipher.yml"],
			"env": {
				"OPENAI_API_KEY": "sk-your-openai-key",
				"CIPHER_LOG_LEVEL": "info"
			}
		}
	}
}
```

#### With Custom Configuration

```json
{
	"mcpServers": {
		"cipher": {
			"type": "stdio",
			"command": "cipher",
			"args": ["--mode", "mcp", "--agent", "/path/to/custom-config.yml", "--strict"],
			"env": {
				"OPENAI_API_KEY": "sk-your-openai-key",
				"ANTHROPIC_API_KEY": "sk-ant-your-anthropic-key",
				"OPENROUTER_API_KEY": "sk-or-your-openrouter-key",
				"CIPHER_LOG_LEVEL": "debug",
				"NODE_ENV": "production"
			}
		}
	}
}
```

### Environment Variables

The MCP server requires at least one LLM provider API key:

```bash
# Required (at least one)
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key      # Always required for embedding
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_anthropic_api_key
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_openrouter_api_key

# Optional
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://localhost:11434/v1
CIPHER_LOG_LEVEL=info
NODE_ENV=production
```

### Available Capabilities

When running as an MCP server, Cipher exposes:

**Tools:**

- `ask_cipher` - Chat interface with the memory-powered agent
- Dynamic tool discovery from your agent configuration

**Resources:**

- `cipher://agent/card` - Agent metadata and information
- `cipher://agent/stats` - Runtime statistics and metrics

**Prompts:**

- `system_prompt` - Current system prompt used by the agent

### Configuration Options

```bash
# Basic MCP server
cipher --mode mcp

# With custom agent config
cipher --mode mcp --agent /path/to/custom-config.yml

# Strict mode (all MCP connections must succeed)
cipher --mode mcp --strict

# With new session
cipher --mode mcp --new-session my-session-id
```

## Use Case: Claude Code with Cipher MCP

Cipher integrates seamlessly with Claude Code through MCP, providing persistent memory that enhances your coding experience. Here's how it works:

### Memory Storage

<img src="./assets/cipher_store_memory.png" alt="Cipher storing conversation context" />

Every interaction with Claude Code can be automatically stored in Cipher's dual memory system, capturing both programming concepts and reasoning patterns to improve future assistance.

### Memory Retrieval

<img src="./assets/cipher_retrieve_memory.png" alt="Cipher retrieving previous conversation context" />

When you ask Claude Code to recall previous conversations, Cipher's memory layer instantly retrieves relevant context, allowing you to continue where you left off without losing important details.

For detailed configuration instructions, see the [CLI Coding Agents guide](./examples/02-cli-coding-agents/README.md).

## Next Steps

For detailed documentation, visit:

- [Quick Start Guide](https://docs.byterover.dev/cipher/quickstart)
- [Configuration Guide](https://docs.byterover.dev/cipher/configuration)
- [Complete Documentation](https://docs.byterover.dev/cipher/overview)

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Refer to our [Contributing Guide](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for more details.

## Community & Support

**cipher** is the opensource version of the agentic memory of [byterover](https://byterover.dev/) which is built and maintained by the byterover team.

- Join our [Discord](https://discord.com/invite/UMRrpNjh5W) to share projects, ask questions, or just say hi!
- If you enjoy cipher, please give us a ⭐ on GitHub—it helps a lot!
- Follow [@kevinnguyendn](https://x.com/kevinnguyendn) on X

## Contributors

Thanks to all these amazing people for contributing to cipher!

[Contributors](https://github.com/campfirein/cipher/graphs/contributors)

## Star History

<a href="https://star-history.com/#campfirein/cipher&Date">
  <img width="500" alt="Star History Chart" src="https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=campfirein/cipher&type=Date&v=2">
</a>

## License

Elastic License 2.0. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for full terms.
